Confidential Token Ids (#25)
mobilecoinfoundation/mcips: text/0025-confidential-token-ids.md

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The MobileCoin ledger protocol currently supports one token type, MOB. We would like to allow the addition of assets to the ledger without revealing which assets were involved in any transaction. The transaction confidentiality and integrity guarantees should be the same for the MobileCoin blockchain no matter how many token types are supported. Namely, the sender, the recipient, and the amount should remain private to all except the participants in the transaction, and no double spending or unauthorized minting should be possible. In addition, we now specify that the token type should remain private to all except the participants in the transaction.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A Transaction Output (TxOut) has a confidential `token_id` bytes field (`masked_token_id`). Transactions with inputs and outputs, including a fee output, must be composed of a single `token_id`. Some tokens may have additional functionality, such as minting and burning, which require verification of the `token_id` as part of the authorization of the action.

> Each `token_id` has an explicit minimum fee specified by node operators, and included in the attestation handshake, ensuring that all nodes in the network are configured with the same fee minimums and `token_id` sets. New `token_ids` can be added only with unanimous agreement from all node operators.

Reviewer: IMO centralized token issuance would hamstring MobileCoin as a 'multi-asset ecosystem'. A big part of ethereum's success derives from users having free reign to [define their own tokens](https://steemit.com/ethereum/@maxnachamkin/how-to-create-your-own-ethereum-token-in-an-hour-erc20-verified). Not to mention the added burden on node operators to validate/justify hard forking for every new asset.

Reviewer 2: I think this is correct -- we want users to be able to define their own tokens. But as you have pointed out elsewhere, if those tokens can be used to pay transaction fees, then transaction fees become ineffective as a rate-limiting / DOS prevention mechanism.

However, we believe the following:
* In many cases, users of a payment rail would rather conduct transactions in something pegged to their local fiat currency
* Requiring them to purchase MOB in order to use our network is a negative user experience, and it adds another step to on-boarding. It also adds complexity because now the user has two balances instead of one.
* Therefore, we would rather let them pay the fee in their currency of choice, and the foundation will deal with the conversions on the backend. As long as they pay the foundation something that we know has value, then the fee serves its purpose of DOS mitigation.

So this together suggests that we want to have some way to create alternate tokens that can be used to pay network fees, but we don't want just anyone to be able to stand up such tokens.

So where I hope we will end up is, there will eventually be a way to allow people to create their own tokens, but not all tokens will be allowed to be used to pay fees, and only tokens approved by the foundation will be allowed to do that.

We haven't put much thought yet into what that part of it looks like. If you have suggestions, would love to hear.

> A transaction specifies the `token_id` for the entire transaction, with a cryptographic guarantee that all inputs and outputs are of the same `token_id`. This prevents spending one `token_id` as a member of another `token_id`. The TransactionBuilder now takes a `token_id` as an argument in its initializer. The `token_id` is set in the clear on the `TxPrefix` for a transaction, which is only accessed in the enclave, after the payload is delivered via an encrypted, attested channel. This is similar to the `TxInputs`, and thus has a similar threat model for confidentiality. See [Confidentiality Analysis](#confidentiality-analysis) for an assessment of risk.

Reviewer: If tokens are not truly confidential from the beginning, then there will likely be no way to remove SGX without also removing the 'confidential' from 'confidential tokens'.

Reviewer 2: Right now I think we believe it can be done using ZK-STARK's. I expect that if we accept this MCIP, then this would be a blocker for removing SGX.

The requirements for the Pedersen generators are:

* The generator used for `MOB = token_id(0)` is the same as before, so `H_0` is a known value.

* The set of all generators used for `token_ids` should be cryptographically "orthogonal", meaning that, it should be intractable for anyone to find a linear relationship between them.

* The function mapping a `token_id`, `i`, to the generator `H_i` must be implemented in constant-time.

The established value for `H_0` in mobilecoin is to take the `RISTRETTO_BASEPOINT` bytes, hash them using Blake2b, and then hash this to the ristretto curve using the elligator map exposed by curve25519-dalek.

We propose to compute `H_i` by converting `i` to little endian bytes, and XOR'ing these bytes over the first four bytes of the `RISTRETTO_BASEPOINT` bytes before hashing them with Blake2b, because this is a simple way to meet these requirements.

For example, an implementation to obtain a generator for `token_id = i` could look like:

```
B = RistrettoPoint::from_hash(Blake2b(HASH_TO_POINT_DOMAIN_TAG | RISTRETTO_BASEPOINT ^ token_id))
B_blinding = RISTRETTO_BASEPOINT
```

> After this change, `range_proofs`, `rct_bulletproofs`, and `ring_signature/mlsags` will be relative to a Pedersen generator, and it is not possible to construct a range proof relative to another generator if those generators are orthogonal. Thus, it is guaranteed that all transaction inputs and outputs are using the same `token_ids`. This is implied by the homomorphic encryption property of [Pedersen Commitments](https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs754/2001fa/129.PDF), namely that addition on the commitments preserves the additive relationship of the pre-committed values, as long as they are using the same group generator. `H_i` is revealed to the verifier, who must show that the sum of inputs does not overflow, or `sum(outputs) = a * G + b * H_i` for some TxOut-specific values of `a` and `b`. 

Reviewer: Modifying range proof structures to accommodate this proposal is intrusive, prevents efficient batch-verification which directly affects the upper bound of tx throughput, and may impose a burden on/barrier to future proof upgrades.

Reviewer 2: That's a good point, and a reason to do it the way the Spats proposal works.

I think right now we don't have any of the batch verification stuff in place, so we'll have to think seriously about this. I don't know if this is actually the bottleneck right now in transaction validation.

commitment = H_i * Scalar::from(amount) + G * blinding_factor
```

- Note, the group generators for `token_ids` are computed using hashing to a curve so that they are "orthogonal" for computable adversaries, meaning there is no discernable, nontrivial linear relationship between base points. See our [transaction core group generators reference](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/blob/master/transaction/core/src/ring_signature/mod.rs#L29). 
    - Note also, the blinding factor base point does not need to be unique per `token_id`, so we use the same blinding factor base point for all `token_ids`.

### Fee Outputs

Currently, the enclave aggregates the fees for multiple transactions in a block, in order to mint a single fee output for the block and conserve space. To support multiple confidential `token_ids`, when minting fee outputs, the enclave must create multiple fee outputs if multiple `token_ids` were used in the block. A consideration here is that we would like for an observer not to discern whether a block contains transactions of multiple asset types by statistically analyzing the number of outputs to derive information about the number of fee outputs. 

> A simple proposal is that each block now contains a number of fee outputs scaling linearly with the total number of supported `token_ids`. This way we can continue to aggregate fees, but not reveal how many token types were included in the block. For blocks with fewer transactions than `token_ids`, the number of fee outputs is `min(num_token_ids, num_transactions_in_block)`

Reviewer: This greatly increases fee output spam (which has privacy implications), and prevents [fee epochs](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/10) as mentioned previously.

Reviewer 2: 1. I guess I'm not sure that this is greatly increasing fee output spam. We currently only have one transaction per block typically. So every 3rd transaction output or so is fee right now. I don't think this proposal can ever lead to more than this, and also in the case of heavy load, if there are hundreds of transactions in a block but many fewer token ids, then this will be better than that.
2. Can you explain why this prevent fee epochs? It seems to me that fee epochs would still work just fine if we decided it was necessary, we will just accumulate fees from several different token types.

Reviewer: 1. Ah my mistake, 'greatly' isn't accurate for this PR, although PR #31 could make it significant.
2. Fee epochs requires printing the fee amount in block headers, so it would eliminate the confidentiality of token ids. Maybe you could use pedersen commitments or something, but to prevent node operators from obtaining a token id oracle you'd need one commitment (and masked amount/id) per extant token id, which leads to a lot of blockchain bloat (possibly even more bloat than current fee spam causes, if the list of token ids became long enough).

Reviewer 2: I see -- I didn't realize it was storing the fee amount in the block headers.

Is that necessary for it to work? What if we just stored in fee output in (ephemeral) enclave memory and wrote out some number of TxOut's every 1000 blocks or so as you suggest. 

It might be annoying in that we might have to give the enclaves a way to sync this state, so if nodes go down and come back up they will have the right accumulated fee values. I would kind of like them to sync up anyways on the hash of the latest block, so that doesn't seem too onerous to also sync the accumulated fee values.

The worst case would be that all the enclaves went down and some accumulated fees were lost. But, that might be acceptable, we've tried to engineer it all so that never happens anyways.

Reviewer 2: Idk what the path would be here when SGX is removed though, that seems pretty tricky.

Reviewer: > It might be annoying in that we might have to give the enclaves a way to sync this state, so if nodes go down and come back up they will have the right accumulated fee values. I would kind of like them to sync up anyways on the hash of the latest block, so that doesn't seem too onerous to also sync the accumulated fee values.

I feel like this would be an easy way to break the network, since it sounds like you don't want to use SCP for syncing... (which is designed to prevent breakage).

Reviewer 2: For a lot of configuration right now, such as minimum fee settings, the strategy is to use start-up parameters that become part of the responder id, and leverage node-to-node attestation to ensure that the nodes are all configured the same way. This is because it is simpler to do it this way right now, than to use SCP to consense on config. (We would like to get there though.)

I don't think this actually makes the network more brittle -- it makes problems surface immediately if nodes are misconfigured because there is no way a node can proceed if it can't attest to the other nodes.

This is not dynamic state, which is more complex for sure. But it is an example of using attestation to ensure that some data is being shared correctly.

The reason I'm not sure we need to "consense on accumulated fees" is, the accumulated fees are strictly a function of the transactions in each block. And we are already using SCP to consense on that. So we can just compute (in the enclave) based on what we already consensed on, and we don't need to do a second round of consensus to agree on the (deterministic) computation of fees.

The only part about this that is different from what we already do is, when a node restarts, its enclave loses all state. Currently, nodes that fall far enough behind go into a catchup mode where they trust blocks based on peer signatures and don't expect to see the Tx's for those blocks. Eventually they finish catching up and then they are validating transactions in the enclave again. However, if we tried to do fee epochs with secret accumulation in the enclaves, they would have to recover the accumulated fees as well from their peers, when they exit catchup. I don't think this would be a problem though if the accumulated fees are transmitted using node to node attestation.

Reviewer: IIRC, node catch-up (state recovery) relies on SCP (see mechanics of mobilecoin section 9.4.1).

Reviewer 2: it relies on SCP in that, the decision to trust blocks based on peer signatures is based on if those peers form a quorum.

i think it is also valid to send fee counters over node-to-node attested channels, based on a group of peers that form a quorum

Reviewer: From the meeting: @garbageslam mentioned that you could use fee priorities to build a token ID oracle from user-transmitted transactions, since users don't validate node configuration.

### Fee Priority and Transaction Sorting

Currently the [WellFormedTxContext](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/blob/a092039a4a5cc7f5e3e16eeadd0b2bc3a12667ae/consensus/enclave/api/src/lib.rs#L50) contains the fee, which must be used by untrusted to [sort transactions](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/blob/a092039a4a5cc7f5e3e16eeadd0b2bc3a12667ae/consensus/enclave/api/src/lib.rs#L131) when [combining transactions](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/blob/a092039a4a5cc7f5e3e16eeadd0b2bc3a12667ae/consensus/service/src/tx_manager/untrusted_interfaces.rs#L40) for consideration by the enclave, prioritizing higher fees for inclusion in the block during periods of network congestion. In order to keep the `token_id` confidential, we must provide a mechanism for untrusted to accurately sort transactions before asking the enclave to do work on the transactions, without revealing the `token_id`, and at the same time, allowing for different asset types to express differing minimum fee requirements.

> To derive a sorting order without revealing the transaction type, the `fee` in the `WellFormedTxContext` derives a `priority`, which is calculated based on some ratio between the minimum fees configured by the node operator on startup. For example, the network operators may have configured the following minimum fees:

Reviewer: This may allow node operators to set up a token-id oracle.

Reviewer 2: We're trying to avoid that by normalizing based on minimum fee, usually the users just always use the minimum fee, and then priority would reveal no information.

It is true that we would not have this problem if MOB were the only thing that could be used for fees.

Reviewer: A node operator can set a tx's priority to an arbitrary value by configuring the minimum fees on startup. This lets them guess-and-check the sorting to find the tx's token id.

Reviewer 2: > A node operator can set a tx's priority to an arbitrary value by configuring the minimum fees on startup

That's true but their node can't consense with other nodes unless they have the same configuration as them, because the config is hashed and then appended to the responder id used for node-to-node attestation. This means the the nodes won't be able to pair to eachother unless they have the same config.

So in real life, the attacker has to hard fork the network, and control all the nodes that the user is submitting to, in order to conduct this guess-and-check attack.

Still, I agree it would be better if this weren't possible at all.

Reviewer: I see, then I think this part of the document should be clarified, since the way it's written it sounds like nodes can freely define their own startup values.

- Feature Name: `confidential_token_ids`
- Start Date: 2022-02-05
- MCIP PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mcips#0025](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/0025)
- Implementation PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin#1438](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/pull/1438)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Enable new token types to be added to the protocol and transacted on chain without revealing the token type.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> The MobileCoin ledger protocol currently supports one token type, MOB. We would like to allow the addition of assets to the ledger without revealing which assets were involved in any transaction. The transaction confidentiality and integrity guarantees should be the same for the MobileCoin blockchain no matter how many token types are supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The MobileCoin ledger protocol currently supports one token type, MOB. We would like to allow the addition of new assets to the ledger. The transaction confidentiality and integrity guarantees should be the same for the MobileCoin blockchain no matter how many token types are supported.
```

Specifically, for both MOB and synthetic assets,
* the sender
* the recipient
* the amount

of the transaction should remain private to the sender and recipient of the transaction.

In addition we would also like that the token id should remain private.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

A `token_id` is a 64-bit number. Every `TxOut` will now have a corresponding `token_id`, and this will be committed to the chain via a new `masked_token_id` field.
The `token_id` of a `TxOut` is recovered by a `TxOut` owner in a similar way to the `value`, during view key matching.

The transaction object may now spend inputs and outputs of any token id, but in a single transaction all inputs and outputs must have the same `token_id`.

The fee for such a transaction is also paid in that `token_id`. This is now specified in the `fee_token_id` field in the `TxPrefix`, and implies the token id for all inputs and outputs.

The minimum fee varies from token id to token id. This is configured by network operators at startup, and hashed into the responder id during node-to-node attestation to ensure that the network

> has one uniform value for minimum fee.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has one uniform value for minimum fee for each token.
```

Previously, the fee of a `Tx` is exposed directly to the nodes (outside of the enclave) so that they can sort transactions by fee. After this change, the fee value may reveal information about the
token id, because different tokens have different minimum fees. To mitigate this, the enclave divides the fee by the minimum fee, deriving a new value called `priority` which is revealed to the node
to sort the transactions.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For technical reasons, the minimum fee of every token now has additional requirements:

* It must be at least 128
* It must be evenly divisible by 128

```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

### Recap

Recall that in current revisions of MobileCoin, the value of a `TxOut` impacts the fields of the `TxOut` in two ways:

> * It appears in the masked value, where it bytes have been XOR'ed with the result of hashing the `TxOut` shared-secret

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It appears in the `masked_value`. Here the bytes of the u64 value have been XOR'ed with the result of hashing the `TxOut` shared-secret
```

* It appears in the Pedersen commitment (`Amount::Commitment`), which has the form `v * H + v_blinding * G`

Here `H` is a curve point derived by hashing to curve, and `G` is the ristretto basepoint. `v_blinding`, the blinding factor,
is also derived by a hash of the `TxOut` shared secret.

During view key matching, the recipient of a `TxOut` attempts to compute the shared secret, by key exchange with their view private key

> against the `TxOut` public key. They cannot confirm that this shared secret computation was successful -- however, if it is successful,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
against the `TxOut` public key. They cannot confirm directly that this shared secret computation was successful -- however, if it is successful,
```
